Move Generating Acknowledgements to Transport (#2916)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

expectations about what implementations do with packets that have errors after
valid frames? -->

## Generating Acknowledgements {#generating-acks}

An acknowledgement SHOULD be sent immediately upon receipt of a second
ack-eliciting packet. QUIC recovery algorithms do not assume the peer sends

> an ACK immediately when receiving a second ack-eliciting packet.

Reviewer: This is an odd lead-in.  Do you want to start by saying a few more general things?

1. endpoints send acknowledgements for all packets they receive and process
2. loss recovery doesn't depend on immediate acknowledgment, but performance can be improved by acknowledging immediately in some cases
3. packets that aren't ack-eliciting are only acknowledged when sending an ACK for other reasons
4. there are recommendations to send immediate acknowledgments in a dazzling array of cases
   a. when receiving the second ack-eliciting packet
   b. when it appears as though there is loss or reordering, though not for every packet
   c. when new CRYPTO data is available to send (aka the incoming CRYPTO flight is outstanding)
   d. ...
5. When sending a packet for any reason, it's generally a good idea to send an ACK if one has not been sent recently.

In order to accelerate loss recovery and reduce timeouts, the receiver SHOULD

> send an immediate ACK after it receives an out-of-order packet. It could send

Reviewer 2: What's the exact definition for `out-of-order`? If the last packet number received is `X`, are received packet numbers of `X+2` and `X-1` both considered out of order?

Author: Yes, both would be considered out of order.  I thought we already said to send an immediate ACK when the PN is not 1 larger than the largest processed packet number, but I can't find it.

caused by losing previously sent ACK frames, at the cost of larger ACK frames.

ACK frames SHOULD always acknowledge the most recently received packets, and the
more out-of-order the packets are, the more important it is to send an updated
ACK frame quickly, to prevent the peer from declaring a packet as lost and
spuriously retransmitting the frames it contains.

Below is one recommended approach for determining what packets to include in an
ACK frame.

### Receiver Tracking of ACK Frames

When a packet containing an ACK frame is sent, the largest acknowledged in that
frame may be saved.  When a packet containing an ACK frame is acknowledged, the
receiver can stop acknowledging packets less than or equal to the largest
acknowledged in the sent ACK frame.

In cases without ACK frame loss, this algorithm allows for a minimum of 1 RTT
of reordering. In cases with ACK frame loss and reordering, this approach does
not guarantee that every acknowledgement is seen by the sender before it is no
longer included in the ACK frame. Packets could be received out of order and
all subsequent ACK frames containing them could be lost. In this case, the

> loss recovery algorithm may cause spurious retransmits, but the sender will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
loss recovery algorithm could cause spurious retransmits, but the sender will
```

expectations about what implementations do with packets that have errors after
valid frames? -->

## Generating Acknowledgements {#generating-acks}

Endpoints acknowledge all packets they receive and process. However, only
ack-eliciting packets trigger the sending of an ACK frame.  Packets that are not
ack-eliciting are only acknowledged when an ACK frame is sent for other reasons.

When sending a packet for any reason, an endpoint should attempt to bundle an
ACK frame if one has not been sent recently. Doing so helps with timely loss
detection at the peer.  While loss detection and congestion control do not
depend on receiving an immediate acknowledgment for packets that are sent,
performance can be improved by acknowledging immediately in several cases, as
discussed below.

### Sending ACK Frames

An ACK frame SHOULD be sent immediately upon receipt of a second ack-eliciting
packet. Loss detection does not assume that the peer sends an ACK immediately on

> receiving a second ack-eliciting packet.

Reviewer: These are both good and useful statements, but they sort of stand awkwardly next to each other as if they are strangers.

> An endpoint SHOULD immediately send an ACK frame when two ack-eliciting packets have been received without being acknowledged.  Though the algorithms in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}} do not depend on receivers following this guidance, frequent feedback improves loss and congestion response.

I tried to say something about the fact that this also provides some assurances about acknowledgement behaviour that senders could use when innovating with new algorithms, but it ended up being quite hard to do that without distracting too much from the core purpose of the section.  Also, the SHOULD got in the way: there is no real assurance, there we have to rely on the fact that this is a good recommendation that most deployments will likely respect.

Author: I want to do another larger pass over this text, but I'd like to keep it as is for now.

Reviewer 3: I'm trying out something -- give me a few minutes

Reviewer 3: Ok, a few changes, look at the last commit. I've moved some text around and I think I've captured the spirit of this more clearly.

ack-eliciting packets (see {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}) trigger the sending of an ACK
frame.  Packets that are not ack-eliciting are only acknowledged when an ACK
frame is sent for other reasons.

When sending a packet for any reason, an endpoint should attempt to bundle an
ACK frame if one has not been sent recently. Doing so helps with timely loss
detection at the peer.

In general, frequent feedback from a receiver improves loss and congestion
response, but this has to be balanced against excessive load generated by a
receiver that sends an ACK frame in response to every ack-eliciting packet.  The
guidance offered below seeks to strike this balance.

### Sending ACK Frames

An ACK frame SHOULD be generated for at least every second ack-eliciting packet.
This recommendation is in keeping with standard practice for TCP {{?RFC5681}}.

A receiver's delayed acknowledgment timer SHOULD NOT exceed the current RTT
estimate or the value it indicates in the `max_ack_delay` transport parameter.
This ensures an acknowledgment is sent at least once per RTT when packets
needing acknowledgement are received.  The sender can use the receiver's

> `max_ack_delay` value in determining timeouts for timer-based retransmission.

Reviewer 2: Does this text `SHOULD NOT exceed the current RTT estimate` mean the peer could/should use a min of the max_ack_delay and the current RTT when computing probe timeouts?
```
PTO = smoothed_rtt + max(4*rttvar, kGranularity) + min(max_ack_delay, smoothed_rtt)
```

Author: Yes, probably.  This text is pre-existing, and maybe with max_ack_delay the 1 ack per RTT recommendation should be removed, but that's not an editorial change.

acknowledged.  Therefore, the receiver SHOULD repeatedly acknowledge newly
received packets in preference to packets received in the past.

### Measuring and Reporting Host Delay {#host-delay}

An endpoint measures the delays intentionally introduced between when an
ACK-eliciting packet is received and the corresponding acknowledgment is sent.
The endpoint encodes this delay for the largest acknowledged packet in the

> Ack Delay field of an ACK frame (see Section 19.3). This allows the receiver

Reviewer 3: change "Section 19.1" to a real reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ack Delay field of an ACK frame (see {{frame-ack}}). This allows the receiver
```

of the ACK to adjust for any intentional delays, which is important for

> delayed acknowledgements, when estimating the path RTT. A packet might be

Reviewer: I think that you mean "which is important for getting a better estimate of the path RTT when acknowledgments are delayed"

held in the OS kernel or elsewhere on the host before being processed.

> An endpoint SHOULD NOT include these unintentional delays when populating

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An endpoint MUST NOT include delays that is does not control when populating
```

I think that we can use MUST NOT here.  Also, I think that outside of endpoint control is the key.

the Ack Delay field in an ACK frame.

An endpoint MUST NOT excessively delay acknowledgements of ack-eliciting

> packets.  The maximum ack delay is communicated in the max_ack_delay transport

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packets.  An endpoint commits to a maximum delay using the max_ack_delay transport
```

> parameter; see Section 18.1.  max_ack_delay implies an explicit contract:

Reviewer 3: change to a real reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameter; see {{transport-parameter-definitions}}.  max_ack_delay implies an explicit contract:
```

an endpoint promises to never delay acknowledgments of an ack-eliciting packet
by more than the indicated value. If it does, any excess accrues to the RTT

> estimate and could result in spurious retransmissions from the peer.

Reviewer: Do you really get spurious retransmissions if your estimate of RTT is too high?  I thought that the effect would just come down to poor performance, maybe over-commitment of memory, and that sort of thing.

Reviewer 3: I think this should have been "delayed retransmissions".

needing acknowledgement are received.  The sender can use the receiver's
`max_ack_delay` value in determining timeouts for timer-based retransmission.

### Managing ACK Ranges

When an ACK frame is sent, one or more ranges of acknowledged packets are
included.  Including older packets reduces the chance of spurious retransmits
caused by losing previously sent ACK frames, at the cost of larger ACK frames.

ACK frames SHOULD always acknowledge the most recently received packets, and the
more out-of-order the packets are, the more important it is to send an updated
ACK frame quickly, to prevent the peer from declaring a packet as lost and
spuriously retransmitting the frames it contains.

> Below is one recommended approach for determining what packets to include in an

Reviewer: "Below" is a little imprecise.  Is this the next section, or next several sections?

```suggestion
{{ack-tracking}} and {{ack-limiting}} describe an exemplary approach for determining what packets to acknowledge in each
```

ACK frame.

> ### Receiver Tracking of ACK Frames

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Receiver Tracking of ACK Frames {#ack-tracking}
```

When a packet containing an ACK frame is sent, the largest acknowledged in that
frame may be saved.  When a packet containing an ACK frame is acknowledged, the
receiver can stop acknowledging packets less than or equal to the largest
acknowledged in the sent ACK frame.

In cases without ACK frame loss, this algorithm allows for a minimum of 1 RTT
of reordering. In cases with ACK frame loss and reordering, this approach does
not guarantee that every acknowledgement is seen by the sender before it is no
longer included in the ACK frame. Packets could be received out of order and
all subsequent ACK frames containing them could be lost. In this case, the
loss recovery algorithm could cause spurious retransmits, but the sender will
continue making forward progress.

> ### Limiting ACK Ranges

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Limiting ACK Ranges {#ack-limiting}
```

acknowledged.  Therefore, the receiver SHOULD repeatedly acknowledge newly
received packets in preference to packets received in the past.

### Measuring and Reporting Host Delay {#host-delay}

An endpoint measures the delays intentionally introduced between when an
ACK-eliciting packet is received and the corresponding acknowledgment is sent.
The endpoint encodes this delay for the largest acknowledged packet in the Ack
Delay field of an ACK frame (see {{frame-ack}}). This allows the receiver of the
ACK to adjust for any intentional delays, which is important for getting a
better estimate of the path RTT when acknowledgments are delayed. A packet might
be held in the OS kernel or elsewhere on the host before being processed.  An
endpoint MUST NOT include delays that is does not control when populating the
Ack Delay field in an ACK frame.

An endpoint MUST NOT excessively delay acknowledgements of ack-eliciting
packets.  An endpoint commits to a maximum delay using the max_ack_delay
transport parameter; see {{transport-parameter-definitions}}.  max_ack_delay

> implies an explicit contract: an endpoint promises to never delay

Reviewer: implies explicit is odd:

```suggestion
declares an explicit contract: an endpoint promises to never delay
```
